---
title: Standardized Type Ordering
document: PxxxxR0
date: 2022-10-29
audience:
  - Currently Just Gasper
author:
  - name: Nate Nichols
    email: <natenichols@cox.net>
---

# Abstract 

Currently, `std::type_info` provides a stable but _implementation defined_ order
of types. Despite being unchangeable at runtime, the implimentation defined
`type_info::before` is not marked `constexpr`. This paper explores a
standardized ordering of types in C++, as well as the impact of marking 
`type_info::before` constexpr.

# Revision History

N/A

# Motivation

There is currently no way in C++ to sort types at compile time. Sorting types at
compile time is essential for well-performing typesets, required by various
policy-based template libraries.

This presents unsolvable problems for libraries that provide types whose
behavior is configured using a set (not a list) of policies.

The inability to sort these policies into a canonical order results in having
several ways of constructing an otherwise identical type.

# Proposal

## Ordering of Types

We propose the following as a canonical way of sorting all types that are
generated by the compiler. This order will be available at compile time. This 
proposal does not encompass type successors (i.e. `typeid(int).next()`), 
defining only a comparison on two known types. 
(i.e. `typeid(int).before(typeid(char)))`)

### Ordering Native Types

Providing an ordering for native types can be done in any arbitrary way.

We propose to order them as follows:
```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------

void
bool
char
char8_t
wchar_t
char16_t
char32_t
int
float
double

// ------ Highest ------
```

### Size Modifiers

Size modifiers will order based on the least possible size of the equivalent 
type. For example, the equivalent type of a `signed int` is just `int`.

The ordering of all `int` types would be: 

```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------

short int
int
long int
long long int

// ------ Highest ------
```

### Signedness Modifiers

Similarly we propose to order signedness modifiers.

`unsigned` types will be ordered after `signed`:

The order of `unsigned int` and `signed int` are
```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------

signed int
unsigned int

// ------ Highest ------
```

Sort on size modifiers first, then sort on signedness.

Combining these two orderings, the order of all possible integer types would be:
```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------

short int
unsigned short int
int
unsigned int
long int
unsigned long int
long long int
unsigned long long int

// ------ Highest ------
```

It is worth noting that both signedness and size modifiers only exist on native
types, and as such will only be taken into account when sorting user defined
types. 

### Ordering References and Pointers

Pointers, lvalue references, and rvalue references should be ordered as 
follows:

```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------
using T = ...;

T // unspecified
T* // Pointer
T& // lvalue Reference
T&& // rvalue Reference

// ------ Highest ------
```

### Type Qualifiers

`const`, `volatile` and `mutable` qualifiers should be ordered as follows:

Volatile modifiers would be ordered with `unspecified < volatile`.

Constantness modifiers would be ordered: `unspecified < const < mutable`

Order first based on volatileness, then on constantness.

For example:

```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------

using T = ...;

T
const T
mutable T
const volatile T
mutable volatile T

// ------ Highest ------
```

### Non Templated User Defined Types

Simple User Defined Types can be defines as either a `struct` or a `class` that
has been declared without a template parameter. As far as ordering is concerned,
structs and classes should be treated the same.

User defined types will be greater than native types.

Ordering these is simple, since we cannot redeclare two types with the same
name, we'll just order simple user defined types alphabetically. 

```cpp
struct Apple {};
class Banana {};
struct Carrot {};

```

Would be ordered as `Apple < Banana < Carrot`.

References and pointers to, as well as type qualifiers on, will behave the same
way on user defined types as they do on native types. For example, given:

```cpp
Apple
Carrot
Apple&
Banana const&
Carrot&&
```

Would be ordered `Apple < Apple& < Banana const&  < Carrot < Carrot&&`

### namespaces

Namespaces will also be ordered alphabetically.

Given:
```cpp
namespace foo {
  struct i;
}

namespace bar {
  struct i;
}
```

The order of the two structs w/ type `i` types would be `bar::i < foo::i`

Combining the above, we can define an order for every possible combination of
type, qualifier, and pointer/reference. 

1. Order alphabetically by namespace and type. Native types come before user defined types.
2. Order by pointer or reference. 
3. Order by type qualifier.

### Type Aliases 

The ordering of type aliases is to be the same as the type they are aliased to.

For example, the order of the following `<cstdint>` type aliases would be:

```cpp
// ------ Lowest ------

int8_t // signed char
uint8_t // unsigned char
int16_t // signed short int
uint16_t // unsigned short int
int32_t // long int
uint32_t // unsigned long int
int64_t // long long int
uint64_t // unsigned long long int

// ------ Highest ------
```

## Non-Templated User Defined Functions

User Defined function types will be ordered by 

1. Name (alphabetically)
2. Return type, ordered as described above
3. Number of parameters
4. Order of parameters. Applied left to right and ordered as described above.

```cpp
void foo(int i);
void bar(int i);
```

First, order by name, so `void bar(int) < void foo(int)`

```cpp
void foo(int);
int foo(int);
```

Because next priority is to order by return type, `void foo(int) < int bar(int)`

```cpp
void foo(int)
void foo(int, double)
```

Next, order by number of parameters, so `void foo(int) < void foo(int, double)`

```cpp
struct Apple {};
struct Banana {};

void foo(Apple);
void foo(Banana);
```

Finally, order each parameter left to right as described above, so 
`void foo(Apple) < void foo(Banana)`

Left to right meaning the order of the following:

```cpp
struct Apple {};
struct Banana {};

void foo(Apple, Apple);
void foo(Apple, Banana);
void foo(Banana, Apple);
void foo(Banana, Banana);
```

Gives us the ordering
`void foo(Apple, Apple) < void foo(Apple, Banana) < void foo(Banana, Apple) < void foo(Banana, Banana)`

## Lambdas

## Templates

## Anonymous namespace